# s2: v2
#### ([&#x2b11;Table of Contents](./))
# Version Two

*If* (and that's a big "if") s2 version 2 ever becomes a real thing,
this is an overview of what would most likely differ...

# Replace Objects with Hashtables

Objects would be implemented in terms of hashtables. That is, s2 would
still have its base Object type but would use, C-side, `cwal_hash` as
the implementation and would store script-side properties in the
hashtable, possibly reserving the object-side storage for
internal/"hidden" properties. When s2 was first created, hashes were
too memory-hungry to justify that, but that cost has, in the
aggregate, been cut considerably via memory recycling improvements
made since then.

One notable hiccup here is higher-level types which derive from
Object, e.g. Array and Native. Their C-level base type is Object and
that cannot be changed without significant downstream fallout, so we'd
likely need to create "v2" variants of those types in cwal, or even
create cwal v2 at the same time, porting those classes to derive from
hashes in the process (perhaps even completely replacing the base
object type with the hashtable type and providing a compile-time
option to switch the internal property storage).

Alternately, and probably much simpler, we eliminate the `cwal_hash`
type and move its implementation into the `cwal_object` core.


# Eliminate Type-lax Comparison Ops

Consolidate type-lax and type-strict comparisons into a single
type-strict comparison. i.e. the `===` operator would disappear and
`==` would behave as `===` currently does (type-strictly). The
different comparison types are conceptually an interesting idea but in
practice type-strict comparisons are almost always (95%+) used.


# "Compile" Token Chains

The evaluation engine would probably remain more or less the same but
would use "pre-compiled" (or "pre-parsed") chains of tokens, rather than parsing its
text on demand. This would cost *much* more memory but would also be
far faster for code called more than once.

We have much of the internals for this already, but porting s2's
current eval engine to use it would require a significant effort. The
"holy grail" would be an API which allows us to use the conventional
(slow but memory light) approach or the "compiled" approach, and even
mix the two (e.g. compiled for function bodies and loops and conventional
for most of everything else), but such an API has eluded me so far, at least
in part because the eval engine takes some embarrassingly low-level liberties
with the tokenizer engine which are not legal with the pre-parsed tokens.
